# `soc_cfg`

This directory contains YAML files that specify how to apply initial tags to SOC elements when
the validator starts up.

The SOC configuration is applied before any tagging information generated by the tools in
`tagging_tools` is applied.

The validator itself will, in a hardcoded manner, tag the initial register state of the processor,
but items that are memory mapped, such as UARTs, and which can shift around depending on which SOC
configuration Renode or some other simulator is using, are left to be specified by the configuration
files here.

Currently, there is only a single `miv_cfg.yml` file that specifies how to setup initial tags for
elements of the SOC in the MiV demo board supplied by Renode.  The values of the actual tags is
determined by looking at information provided by the policy tool in the generated policy.

# Syntax

The syntax should be fairly obvious from the example file, with a couple of caveats.
Each element in the SOC is named for descriptive purposes only.  The `name` field in each
element specifies the name of the tag that should be applied to this element.  This
value will be looked up in the generated policy YAML files.  The `heterogenous` field
specifies to the validator that for the address range specified, there may end up being
multiple different tags over time.  Initially they will be all set to the one initial tag.
Elements that have a `false` for the `heterogeneous` field will be assumed to have one and
only one tag for the entire address range.
